Cyber          Security                   Small
                                              Business
                                              Guide
    Response       and   Recovery
                                              Collection

    How to prepare for a cyber incident, from response
    through to recovery

     Contents

     3    Introduction

     4    Step 1: Prepare for incidents
     7    Step 2: Identify what’s happening

     9    Step 3: Resolve the incident
     10   Step 4: Report the incident

          to wider stakeholders
     11   Step 5: Learn from the incident

     1 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/small-business-guide
     2 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/10-steps-to-cyber-security/the-10-steps/incident-management
     3 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/board-toolkit/planning-your-response-to-cyber-incidents
     4 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/new-cyber-attack-categorisation-system-improve-uk-response-incidents
     5 https://report.ncsc.gov.uk/

     2  National Cyber Security Centre

                               What is an incident?
       Introduction
                               The NCSC define a cyber incident as
                               unauthorised access (or attempted
       It’s natural for all organisations to access) to an organisation’s IT systems.
       experience bumps in the road. As a These may be breaches (when you’re
       UK business there is around a 1 in 2 aware of the unauthorised access of
       chance that you will experience a cyber data or systems) or malicious attacks
       breach*. When something unexpected (such as denial of service attacks,
       happens, such as a cyber incident, it malware infection, ransomware or
       can be difficult to know how to react. phishing attacks), or could simply be
       Naturally, you will want to resolve the accidental events (such as damage
       problem as quickly as possible so you from fire/flood/theft).
       can resume business as normal.
                               Reporting incidents
       For these reasons, the NCSC has If you are a business, charity or other
       created this Small Business Guide to organisation which is currently suffering
       Response and Recovery. It provides a live cyber attack (in progress), call
       small to medium sized organisations 0300 123 2040 immediately. This service is
       with guidance about how to prepare available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
       their response, and plan their recovery Your call will be dealt with as a priority
       to a cyber incident. It’s a companion and your live incident will be triaged over
       piece to our guidance on how to the phone. Your incident will then be
       protect yourself from cyber attacks1. passed onto the Report Fraud Analysis
                               Service who will review your report and
       If you’re a larger business, or face a conduct a range of enquiries, it may
       greater impact from a cyber incident, then get passed to the relevant law
       then the Incident Management section enforcement agency. You will be kept
       in 10 Steps to Cyber Security2 can further informed of the status of your report.
       help your cyber response.
       Board members should refer to our If your organisation has been the victim
       guidance on planning your response of a significant cyber attack4, the NCSC
       to cyber incidents3.    recommends that you start
                               by reporting the incident to us5.
          UK
        businesses
              UK  of businesses/charities £3,230
             charities identified cyber security is the average annual cost for organisations
                  breaches or attacks in that identified breaches with an outcome
                  the last 12 months
         46%  26%
         Among the 46%/26% identifying
             breaches or attacks:
          27%          20%           14%      32%
          42%          33%           22%      22%
       Needed new   Added staff time to had staff stopped identified at
       measures to prevent deal with breach or from carrying out least one breach
       future attacks inform others daily work or attack a week
       *Source: The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport’s ‘Cyber Security Breaches Survey 2020’
                                    National Cyber Security Centre 3

     Step  1:                Next, identify what business processes
                             and systems are critical to keep your
     Prepare  for
                             organisation running. For example, the
                             website where your customers place
     Incidents
                             orders, or the computer-controlled
                             manufacturing equipment you use.
     Unforeseen events, both malicious and If you’ve not already done so, identify
     accidental, can occur in many ways. these key systems and processes as
     So it is impractical to develop detailed soon as possible, and record where
     step-by-step instructions to manage they are stored (or how they are
     every type of incident, as the list could accessed).
     be endless. Instead you should prepare
     your business for the most common
     threats you face by developing plans ACTION POINT: Assign joint
     to handle those incidents most likely (or shared) responsibility with
     to occur.                   another person to ensure
                                 there’s cover when you aren’t
     Identify critical systems and assets available (for instance when
     Identify what electronic information on holiday, or away with
     is essential to keep your organisation business). Ensure key
     running, such as contact details, emails, documents are made
     calendars, and essential documents. available and are up to date
     Find out where this information is stored. so that in the event of your
     Is it on single machine in your office? Is absence they can be shared/
     it on a remote server? Is it stored in the learnt by other relevant
     cloud, by a third party?    people.
         ACTION POINT: Make a regular Finally, think in advance about how
         daily/weekly back up copy of you could minimise reputational
         essential information. Regularly damage in the event of an incident.
         test that the backup is working Which key partners do you need to talk
         to ensure you can restore to? Building a good relationship with
         information from it. your partners, where you talk regularly
                             before an event has even occurred, will
                             make things a lot smoother in the event
                             of an incident.

     4  National Cyber Security Centre

                               Put risk on the agenda
           ACTION POINT: Make a list Discussions about organisational risk
           of which key partners (what you value, and what you’re
           (customers, suppliers, third doing to protect it) should be part of
           parties, etc) that you would normal business. Make time to discuss
           need to contact as a result these at your management meetings
           of different types of incident. or weekly catch-ups. Find out where
           For example, you would cyber security threats sit in the priority
           need to contact customers list when compared to physical threats
           and banks if payment data (like burglary and stock theft), flood,
           was compromised, suppliers legal action, and health and safety.
           if corporate accounts were The steps you choose to take to reduce
           attacked, and the ICO if the risk to your business have got to be
           personal customer data proportionate to the risks you take, and
           was stolen.         of course affordable.
                               Organisations that are considering
       Prioritise the risk, and manage it cyber insurance should understand that
       Consider what would happen if you it will not protect you from an attack,
       no longer had access to the critical but it may provide you with additional
       systems or assets you’ve identified resources during and after an incident.
       above. By understanding: So cyber insurance can be considered
                               as an additional risk management tool,
       • what’s important to your business but do take time to:
       • why it’s important, and
       • what you are doing to protect them • understand the scope and scale
                                of the cover provided
       -you can prioritise where you need • ensure that you are able to meet any
       the most protection. If you need more operational requirements placed on
       help with identifying your ‘crown jewels’ you by the insurer
       (i.e. the things most valuable to your
       organisation), please refer to our
       guidance on establishing your baseline
       and identifying what you care about
       most6.

       6 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/board-toolkit/
       establishing-baseline-identifying-care-about-most

                                    National Cyber Security Centre 5

     Make an incident plan   Create a list of external people you
     Make sure you keep the important need to contact who can help you
     information you identified above in identify an incident. For example,
     a safe place so that you can use it if your web hosting provider, IT support
     your equipment is stolen or damaged services or cloud service provider.
     by a cyber attack. Ensure you know Document the details of the contract,
     how to restore a backup in the event including what is covered, how they
     of any type of data loss, such as a can help you, and at what point
     ransomware attack7, and train the do you need to engage with them.
     relevant people in your organisation so Being prepared and having relevant
     they can do the same. Assign roles to documents accessible and up to date
     members of staff, and document who could save you time post incident.
     owns each responsibility in the event
     of an incident, and how can they be
     contacted.                  ACTION POINT: Have you got
                                 the most up to date contact
                                 information for those you need
         ACTION POINT: The best way to to contact? Is it stored in the
         test your staff’s understanding right place and easy to access,
         of what’s required during an keeping in mind that your
         incident is through exercising. normal means of
         Consider using the NCSC’s communication may be
         free Exercise in a Box product8 disrupted during an incident?
         to test your organisations Schedule in time to check
         resilience and preparedness. these details every couple of
                                 months or as necessary.
     Understand and document possible
     incident ‘trigger points’ such as when If you have Cyber Insurance, have
     ownership of an action or decision your insurer’s details documented
     transfers between people. For example, including policy number and any
     an employee may own the action to specific information your provider asks
     identify when there’s an issue with the for. Understand any legal or regulatory
     website, but once that has been done, compliance you must adhere to and
     who decides if the website should be implement any guidelines/policies/rules
     shut down? Your plan should identify at they set out for you. You should check
     what point senior management needs if your trade association has any help
     to be involved.         or advice lines that you can contact to
                             help you in this situation.
     7 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/protecting-
     your-organisation-ransomware
     8 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/exercise-in-
     a-box
     6  National Cyber Security Centre

       Step  2:
                               10 crucial questions
       Identify what’s
                               1. What problem has been reported,
                                 and by who?
       happening
                               2. What services, programs and/or
                                 hardware aren’t working?
       The first step in dealing effectively with 3. Are there any signs that data has
       an incident involves identifying it. That been lost? For example, have you
       is, how can you detect that an incident received ransom requests, or has
       has occurred (or is still happening)? your data been posted on the
                                 internet?
       Find out if you are being 4. What information (if any) has been
       (or have been) attacked   disclosed to unauthorised parties,
       Things that might indicate a cyber deleted or corrupted?
       incident include:       5. Have your customers noticed
                                 any problems? Can they use
       • computers running slowly your services?
       • users being locked out of their 6. Who designed the affected system,
        accounts                 and who maintains it?
       • users being unable to access 7. When did the problem occur or
        documents                first come to your attention?
       • messages demanding a ransom 8. What is the scope of the problem,
        for the release of your files what areas of the organisation
       • people informing you of strange are affected?
        emails coming out of your domain 9. Have there been any signs as
       • redirected internet searches to whether the problem has
       • requests for unauthorised payments occurred internally within your
       • unusual account activity organisation or externally through
                                 your supply chain?
       Find out what’s happened 10. What is the potential business
       The following 10 questions can help impact of the incident?
       you identify what has occurred. It’s
       a starting point that you can use to
       gather vital information as soon as you
       suspect something has gone wrong.
       The answers will help you provide
       essential information to your internal or
       external IT team who will be resolving
       the problem, and form part of your
       incident review/lessons learnt report.
                                    National Cyber Security Centre 7

     Stop the incident getting any worse
     Take a look at your security software
     (such as antivirus alerts and server/
     audit logs) to see if you are able to
     identify the specifics of the attack, and
     subsequently the cause of the incident.
     If you are unable to do this (but you
     know which device has been affected)
     run your antivirus programme to
     complete a full scan9, and take notes
     of the results it gives you. If nothing is
     found, consider using an alternative
     antivirus programme.
     Use the information you have gathered
     to look for advice online from trusted
     sources such as police or security
     websites. You may be able to find
     instructions there on how to fix the
     problem, although care should be taken
     before acting on unverified advice.
     In the case of internet outage, contact
     your ISP (using the details you’ve
     already identified in your incident plan)
     in the first instance; most will have
     pages that relate to service availability.
     You might learn that the outage is due
     to a fallen tree, rather than a DDoS
     attack. In addition, ensure that you
     understand your provider’s escalation
     process, and know what data they need
     to act on, and what type of SLA/support
     you have paid for.

     9 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/what-is-an-
     antivirus-product

     8  National Cyber Security Centre

       Step  3:
                                   ACTION POINT: If you’re
       Resolve  the
                                   considering using services
                                   from a cyber security
       incident                    consultant10, take appropriate
                                   steps to make sure you use
       The actions in this step will help your reputable organisations,
       organisation get back up-and-running understand their experience,
       as soon as possible. You’ll also need to and know how their offer
       confirm that everything is functioning meets your requirements
       normally, and fix any problems. and your business type.
                                   Relevant technology
       If your IT is managed externally: qualifications are a plus.
       contact the right people to help This will help you to choose
       Contact your external IT providers a provider that suits your
       (that you’ve identified in Step 1) to help organisation.
       you fix the problem. These contacts are
       there to fix the problem and establish
       the impact to your organisation.
       If you manage your own IT:
       put your plan into action
       It’s time to activate the incident plan
       you made in Step 1. Depending on the
       type of incident you are responding to,
       this may involve:
       • replacing infected hardware
       • restoring services through backups
       • patching software
       • cleaning infected machines
       • changing passwords

       10 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/section/products-
       services/all-products-services-categories?productTy
       pe=Consultancy&start=0&rows=20
                                    National Cyber Security Centre 9

     Step  4:
                             Keep everyone informed
                             It’s important to keep your staff and
     Report  the incident
                             customers informed of anything that
                             might affect them (for example, if their
     to the wider
                             personal data has been compromised
                             by a breach).
     stakeholders
     Once a cyber security incident has ACTION POINT: Make staff
     been resolved, formal reporting will aware of any incidents at a
     often be required to both internal time that is proportionate to
     and external stakeholders. There are the effect of the incident. So,
     certain incidents that you’re legally if you have experienced a
     obliged to report to the Information minor incident out of hours,
     Commissioner’s Office (ICO), regardless is it proportionate to contact
     of whether your IT is outsourced. Check staff in the middle of the
     the ICO website11 to find out which night? If relevant, contact
     incidents require this. Other regulatory your customers as soon as
     bodies which you belong to may also possible through the most
     require you to report a breach. appropriate channels.
     Report to law enforcement
     Always remember that a cyber attack Consider legal advice
     is a crime. Report to law enforcement You might want to consider seeking
     via Report Fraud12 or through Police legal advice if the incident has had a
     Scotland’s 101 call centre. The NCSC significant impact on your business
     strongly encourage the reporting of a and/or customers. If you have a cyber
     cyber incident; many go unreported insurance policy, they will be able to
     because of personal embarrassment. provide you with more advice.
     However, if a cyber incident has been
     committed against you, someone else
     may have suffered a similar crime. The
     more individuals report, the more likely
     it is that perpetrators will be arrested,
     charged and convicted.
     11 https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/report-a-
     breach/
     12 https://www.reportfraud.police.uk/reporting-a-
     fraud/
     10 National Cyber Security Centre

       Step  5:
                               Strengthen your defences
                               Reassess your risk and make any
       Learn  from  the
                               necessary changes. For example,
                               if you were a victim of a password
       incident
                               attack you may need to create a
                               new password policy, provide new
       After the incident, it’s important to: training, provide physical secure
                               storage for passwords (or password
       •review what has happened manager apps) for your staff.
       •learn from any mistakes
       •take action to try and reduce the Consider the terms of your contracts
       likelihood of it happening again Depending on how successful the
                               incident response was, you may need
       Not only is it important to review your to make a strategic decision on your
       technical controls after the incident, it is third party contracts. You might want to
       also a great opportunity to review and consider the following:
       implement staff awareness or training
       measures to help develop your staff’s • Does this incident mean the way that
       security culture.        you do business has to change?
                               • If you currently outsource, did their
       Review actions taken during response response meet your needs?
       Collate and review the actions you • If they didn’t meet your needs
       documented throughout the response consider renegotiating the terms of
       to the incident. Make a list of things the contract or cancel, changing to
       that went well and things that could be a new company.
       improved from the response stage. • Did you have the skills in-house to
                                do it yourself, negating the need to
       Review and update your incident plan outsource in the future?
       Where necessary, make changes to the
       incident plan you created in Step 1, to
       reflect the lessons learnt.

                                    National Cyber Security Centre 11

     For further information, or to contact us, please visit: www.ncsc.gov.uk

        @NCSC

        National Cyber Security Centre
        @cyberhq

     © Crown copyright 2020. Photographs produced with permission from third parties.
     NCSC information licensed for re-use under Open Government Licence
     (http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence).
     Information correct at the time of publication - October 2020
     References to Action Fraud removed April 2026; no other changes made.
        Designed and created by Agent Marketing Ltd.
        agentmarketing.co.uk