NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          Executive Summary

          Incident response is a critical part of cybersecurity risk management and should be integrated
          across organizational operations. All six NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 Functions play
          vital roles in incident response:

            •  Govern, Identify, and Protect help organizations prevent some incidents, prepare to
               handle incidents that do occur, reduce the impact of those incidents, and improve
               incident response and cybersecurity risk management practices based on lessons
               learned from those incidents.

            •  Detect, Respond, and Recover help organizations discover, manage, prioritize, contain,
               eradicate, and recover from cybersecurity incidents, as well as perform incident
               reporting, notification, and other incident-related communications.
          Many individuals, teams, and third parties hold a wide variety of roles and responsibilities

          across all of the Functions that support an organization’s incident response. Organizations have
          no direct control over the tactics and techniques used by their adversaries, nor are they certain
          about the timing of a future incident other than knowing that another incident is inevitable.
          However, organizations can use an incident response life cycle framework or model that best
          suits them to develop strong cybersecurity risk management practices that reduce their risks to
          acceptable levels.

          This publication uses the CSF 2.0 Functions, Categories, and Subcategories to organize its
          recommendations, considerations, and other information regarding incident response as a CSF
          2.0 Community Profile. Doing so provides a common taxonomy that is already widely used for
          communicating about incident response and cybersecurity risk management and governance.
          This also enables organizations to access a range of online resources mapped to each Function,
          Category, and Subcategory through the NIST Cybersecurity and Privacy Reference Tool (CPRT).

          These resources include mappings to other incident response and cybersecurity risk
          management standards and guidance, as well as sources of implementation guidance that
          organizations can choose to utilize as needed.
          Organizations should use the incident response life cycle framework or model that suits them

          best. The model in this document is based on CSF 2.0 to take advantage of the wealth of
          resources available for CSF 2.0 and aid organizations that are already using the CSF. Regardless
          of the incident response life cycle framework or model used, every organization should take
          incident response into consideration throughout their cybersecurity risk management activities.

                                          1

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          1. Introduction

          Within this document, an event is any observable occurrence that involves computing assets,
          including physical and virtual platforms, networks, services, and cloud environments. Examples
          of events are user login attempts, the installation of software updates, and an application
          responding to a transaction request. Many events focus on security or have security
          implications. Adverse events are any events associated with a negative consequence regardless
          of cause, including natural disasters, power failures, or cybersecurity attacks. This guide
          addresses only adverse cybersecurity events. Additional analysis is often needed to determine

          whether adverse cybersecurity events indicate that a cybersecurity incident has occurred.
          A cybersecurity incident (or simply incident) is

                  …an occurrence that actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful
                  authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of information or
                  an information system; or constitutes a violation or imminent threat of
                  violation of law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable use
                  policies. [FISMA2014]

          Examples of incidents include an attacker:
            •  Employing a botnet to send high volumes of connection requests to an internet-facing

               service, making it unavailable to legitimate service users
            •  Obtaining administrative credentials at a software-as-a-service provider, which puts
               sensitive tenant data entrusted to that provider at risk

            •  Intruding upon an organization’s business network to steal credentials and use them to
               instruct industrial control systems to shut down or destroy critical physical components,
               causing a major service disruption

            •  Deploying ransomware to prevent the use of computer systems and cause multiple data
               breaches by copying files from those systems

            •  Using phishing emails to compromise user accounts and using those accounts to commit
               financial fraud
            •  Identifying a new vulnerability in network management appliances and exploiting the

               vulnerability to gain unauthorized access to network communications
            •  Compromising a vendor’s software, which is subsequently distributed to customers in its
               compromised state

          Because of the damage that cybersecurity incidents can inflict on organizations and their
          customers, business partners, and others, it is vital to respond quickly and effectively when an
          incident occurs. Effective implementation of incident response processes enables systematic
          responses to and recovery from incidents by analyzing information and taking appropriate
          action. This reduces cybersecurity and enterprise risks by minimizing data loss or theft, the

          disruption of services, and the overall impact of incidents. Lessons learned from incident
          response activities and root cause analysis help improve cybersecurity risk management and

                                          2

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          governance efforts and ensure that the organization is better prepared to identify its current
          technology assets and cybersecurity risks, protect its assets, and detect, respond to, and
          recover from future incidents.

          1.1. Purpose and Scope

          This publication seeks to help organizations incorporate cybersecurity incident response
          recommendations and considerations throughout their cybersecurity risk management
          activities. It also provides a common language that all organizations can use to communicate
          internally and externally regarding their incident response plans and activities.

          The scope of this publication differs significantly from previous versions. Because the details of
          how to perform incident response activities change so often and vary so much across
          technologies, environments, and organizations, it is no longer feasible to capture and maintain
          that information in a single static publication. Instead, this version focuses on improving
          cybersecurity risk management for all of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 Functions
          [CSF2.0] to better support an organization’s incident response capabilities.

          Readers are encouraged to utilize other NIST resources in conjunction with this document,
          including the CSF 2.0 publication and supplemental resources, the Incident Response project
          page, and mappings to additional sources of information on implementing incident response
          considerations available through the NIST Cybersecurity and Privacy Reference Tool (CPRT). An
          example of a CPRT mapping is associating CSF 2.0 outcomes with NIST Special Publication (SP)
          800-53 controls that can be implemented to help achieve the outcomes. In this way, CSF 2.0

          provides a common language that facilitates access to a large number of other resources.
          This publication supersedes SP 800-61r2 (Revision 2), Computer Security Incident Handling
          Guide [SP800-61r2].

          1.2. Document Structure

          The remainder of this document is organized into the following sections and appendices:
            •  Section 2 discusses how incident response has evolved to become a critical part of
               cybersecurity risk management, as well as how the concept of the incident response life

               cycle has changed to reflect that.
            •  Section 3 presents incident response recommendations and considerations for an
               organization’s cybersecurity risk management practices. They are organized and
               documented as a CSF 2.0 Community Profile.

            •  The References section lists references cited throughout this publication.

            •  Appendix A and Appendix B provide an acronyms list and a glossary, respectively.
            •  Appendix C contains a change log of the major changes made since the previous

               revision.

                                          3

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          2. Incident Response as Part of Cybersecurity Risk Management

          This section explains the fundamental concepts of incident response as an integral part of
          cybersecurity risk management. Section 2.1 explores the incident response life cycle and
          proposes a new life cycle model based on CSF 2.0 Functions. Section 2.2 discusses incident
          response roles and responsibilities both inside and outside an organization. Finally, Section 2.3
          briefly examines incident response policies, processes, and procedures.

          2.1. Incident Response Life Cycle Model

          Fig. 1 depicts the incident response life cycle model illustrated in the previous version of this
          publication [SP800-61r2].

                            Fig. 1. Previous incident response life cycle model

          At that time, incidents were relatively rare, the scope of most incidents was narrow and well-
          defined, and incident response and recovery was usually completed within a day or two. Under
          those conditions, it was realistic to treat incident response as a separate set of activities
          performed by a separate team of personnel and to depict all incident response activities as part
          of a circular life cycle. Formal post-incident activities would identify needed improvements and

          feed them into the preparation stage, thus starting the cycle again. Incident response activities
          were typically intermittent rather than continuous.
          However, the current state of incident response has greatly changed since then. Today,
          incidents occur frequently and cause far more damage. Recovering from them often takes

          weeks or months due to their breadth, complexity, and dynamic nature. Incident response is
          now considered a critical part of cybersecurity risk management that should be integrated
          across organizational operations. The lessons learned during incident response should often be
          shared as soon as they are identified, not delayed until after recovery concludes. Continuous
          improvement is increasingly necessary for all facets of cybersecurity risk management in order
          to keep up with modern threats.

                                          4

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          Fig. 2 shows a high-level incident response life cycle model based on the six CSF 2.0 Functions,
          which organize cybersecurity outcomes at their highest level:

            •  Govern (GV): The organization’s cybersecurity risk management strategy, expectations,
               and policy are established, communicated, and monitored.
            •  Identify (ID): The organization’s current cybersecurity risks are understood.

            •  Protect (PR): Safeguards to manage the organization’s cybersecurity risks are used.

            •  Detect (DE): Possible cybersecurity attacks and compromises are found and analyzed.
            •  Respond (RS): Actions regarding a detected cybersecurity incident are taken.

            •  Recover (RC): Assets and operations affected by a cybersecurity incident are restored.
          All six Functions have vital roles in incident response. Govern, Identify, and Protect help

          organizations prevent some incidents, prepare to handle incidents that do occur, reduce the
          impact of those incidents, and improve incident response and cybersecurity risk management
          practices based on lessons learned. Detect, Respond, and Recover help organizations discover,
          manage, prioritize, contain, eradicate, and recover from cybersecurity incidents, as well as
          perform incident reporting, notification, and other incident-related communications.

                       Fig. 2. Incident response life cycle model based on CSF 2.0 Functions

          The bottom level reflects that the preparation activities of Govern, Identify, and Protect are not
          part of the incident response itself. Rather, they are much broader cybersecurity risk
          management activities that also support incident response. Incident response is shown in the
          top level of the figure: Detect, Respond, and Recover. Additionally, the need for continuous
          improvement is indicated as the middle level with the Improvement Category (ID.IM) within the
          Identify Function and the dashed green lines. Lessons learned from performing all activities in

          all Functions are fed into Improvement, and those lessons are analyzed, prioritized, and used to
          inform all of the Functions. This reflects that organizations can learn new lessons at all times

                                          5

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          (e.g., detecting the presence of a new threat and characterizing its behavior) and communicate
          those lessons to the appropriate personnel so that the organization’s incident response and
          other cybersecurity risk management policies, processes, and practices can be adjusted as
          needed.

          Table 1 maps the previous SP 800-61 incident response life cycle model’s phases to the
          corresponding CSF 2.0 Functions used in this document.

              Table 1. Previous incident response life cycle model’s phases and corresponding CSF 2.0 Functions

                Previous Incident Response Life Cycle Model Phase CSF 2.0 Functions

                                                Govern
                Preparation                     Identify (all Categories)

                                                Protect

                                                Detect
                Detection & Analysis
                                                Identify (Improvement Category)
                                                Respond

                Containment, Eradication & Recovery Recover

                                                Identify (Improvement Category)
                Post-Incident Activity          Identify (Improvement Category)

          Organizations should use the incident response life cycle framework or model that suits them
          best. The model in this document is based on CSF 2.0 to take advantage of the wealth of

          resources available for CSF 2.0 and aid organizations that are already using the CSF. The
          appropriate incident response life cycle framework or model for an organization depends on
          many factors; for example, larger and more technology-dependent organizations are likely to
          benefit more from using a framework or model emphasizing continuous improvement than
          other organizations would. Regardless of the incident response life cycle framework or model
          used, every organization should take incident response into consideration throughout their
          cybersecurity risk management activities.

          2.2. Incident Response Roles and Responsibilities

          In the past, incident response activities were performed almost exclusively by incident handlers
          from the organization’s own incident response team. Today, while incident handlers are still
          critically important, most organizations increasingly recognize that the success of their incident
          response efforts depend on the participation of many internal and external parties who hold a
          wide variety of roles and responsibilities and may be spread around the world. Roles and
          responsibilities will differ for each organization and may also differ within an organization based

          on the nature of a particular incident.

                                          6

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

          Examples of incident response roles and responsibilities include the following:
            •  Leadership. The organization’s leadership team oversees incident response, allocates

               funding, and may have decision-making authority on high-impact response actions, such
               as shutting down or rebuilding critical services.
            •  Incident handlers. Incident handlers verify that an incident has occurred, collect and
               analyze data and evidence, prioritize incident response activities, and act appropriately

               to limit damage, find root causes, and restore operations. Incident handlers also often
               provide input to others on mitigating cybersecurity issues and improving resiliency. An
               organization’s incident handlers might be:
                    On staff (e.g., an incident response team),
                 o
                    On contract (e.g., outsourcing a security operations center [SOC] to a managed
                 o
                    security services provider [MSSP] or leveraging a cloud service provider’s
                    incident response team when an incident occurs within that provider’s cloud),
                    and/or
                    Available when needed (e.g., from a parent organization, a cybersecurity services
                 o
                    provider, a business partner, or a law enforcement agency).
               Many organizations may use more than one of these approaches, such as internally
               performing basic incident response and engaging third-party resources for assistance
               with certain incidents. Larger organizations may have multiple incident response teams,
               with each team responsible for a particular logical or physical segment of the
               organization. When this model is employed, the teams should be part of a single
               coordinated entity (e.g., a federation) to ensure that incident response processes,
               procedures, and training are consistent across the organization and that information is

               shared among teams.
            •  Technology professionals. Cybersecurity, privacy, system, network, cloud, and other
               technology architects, engineers, and administrators, as well as software developers,

               may be involved in incident response and recovery efforts.
            •  Legal. Legal experts can review incident response plans, policies, and procedures to
               ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including the right to privacy.
               Legal experts can also review contracts with technology suppliers and other third parties

               when there are incident response implications. In addition, incident responders can seek
               guidance from their organization’s legal department if a particular incident may have
               legal ramifications, such as the prosecution of a suspect, lawsuits, or situations that
               require a memorandum of understanding (MOU) or other binding agreement.
            •  Public affairs and media relations. Depending on the nature and impact of an incident,

               it may be necessary to inform the media and, by extension, the public. Sometimes, the
               media learns of incidents through alternate sources (i.e., not through public affairs
               personnel). Having a media engagement strategy in place can greatly aid in this
               situation.

                                          7

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

            •  Human resources. Certain human resources practices should consider cybersecurity risk
               management, including pre-employment screening and employee onboarding,
               offboarding, and position changes. Human resources may also be involved if an
               employee is suspected of intentionally causing an incident.

            •  Physical security and facilities management. Some computer security incidents occur
               through physical security breaches or involve coordinated logical and physical attacks.
               The incident response team may also need access to facilities during incident handling
               (e.g., to access a compromised workstation in a locked office).

            •  Asset owners. Asset owners (e.g., system owners, data owners, and business process
               owners) may have valuable insights on response and recovery priorities for their
               affected assets. They also need to be kept up to date on the status of response and
               recovery efforts.

          Third parties may be under contract with an organization to help perform incident response
          activities. Some third parties may fill a primary role (e.g., an MSSP performing incident
          detection, response, and recovery activities), while other parties (e.g., cloud service providers
          [CSPs] and internet service providers [ISPs]) may be involved in certain incident response
          activities for particular types of incidents. This is a shared responsibility model in which the

          organization transfers some of its responsibilities to a provider. These responsibilities should be
          clearly defined in a contract, and the incident response team should be aware of the division of
          responsibilities, including information flows, coordination, and authority to act on behalf of the
          organization. This also includes restrictions on what the service provider can do, such as sharing
          sanitized incident information with other customers or making and implementing operational
          decisions (e.g., immediately deactivating certain services to contain an incident).

          A service provider may detect malicious activity sooner than individual organizations would
          because it can correlate events across its customers. In some situations, a service provider
          might be able to use knowledge of an incident with one customer to proactively prevent similar
          incidents with its other customers. Service providers often have privileged access to
          organizational systems and may also have access to sensitive organizational data. Accordingly,
          the risk of malicious insiders or the service provider being compromised should be considered
          and addressed. Non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) and contracting clauses are options for

          deterring the unauthorized disclosure of sensitive data.

          2.3. Incident Response Policies, Processes, and Procedures

          Organizations should have policies that govern their cybersecurity incident response. While a
          policy is highly individualized to the organization, most incident response policies include the
          same key elements:

            •  Statement of management commitment

            •  Purpose and objectives of the policy
            •  Scope of the policy (i.e., to whom and what it applies and under what circumstances)

                                          8

          NIST SP 800-61r3                         Incident Response Recommendations and
          April 2025                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

            •  Definition of events, cybersecurity incidents, investigations, and related terms
            •  Roles, responsibilities, and authorities, such as which roles have the authority to

               confiscate, disconnect, or shut down technology assets
            •  Guidelines for prioritizing incidents, estimating their severity, initiating recovery
               processes, maintaining or restoring operations, and other key actions

            •  Performance measures

          Processes and procedures should be based on the incident response policy and plan.
          Documented procedures should explain how technical processes and other operating
          procedures should be performed. Procedures can be tested or exercised periodically to verify
          their accuracy and can be used to help train new personnel. While it is impossible to have
          detailed procedures for every possible situation, organizations should consider documenting
          procedures for responding to the most common types of incidents and threats. Organizations
          should also develop and maintain procedures for particularly important processes that may be

          urgently needed during emergency situations, such as redeploying the organization’s primary
          authentication platform.
          Many organizations choose to create playbooks as part of documenting their procedures.
          Playbooks provide actionable steps or tasks for people to perform during various scenarios or
          situations. Formatting procedures within a playbook instead of another format can improve

          their usability. See the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) Cybersecurity
          Incident & Vulnerability Response Playbooks [CISA-PB] for incident response playbook
          examples.

                                          9