Appendix     A:  Terminology      and   definitions

        Use of consistent and pre-defined terminology to describe cybersecurity incidents and their effects can be helpful as
        part of cybersecurity incident response planning.

        Cyberthreat

        A cyberthreat is any circumstance or event with the potential to harm systems or data.

        Examples of cyberthreats include (but are not limited to):
          business email compromise

          cybercrime

          cyber supply chain compromise

          exploitation of vulnerabilities

          phishing emails and scams

          ransomware.

        Cybersecurity alert

        A cybersecurity alert is a notification generated in response to a deviation from normal behaviour. Cybersecurity
        alerts are used to highlight cybersecurity events.

        Cybersecurity event

        A cybersecurity event is an occurrence of a system, service or network state indicating a possible breach of security
        policy, failure of safeguards or a previously unknown situation that may be relevant to security.
        Examples of cybersecurity events include (but are not limited to):

          a user has disabled the antivirus on their computer

          a user has deleted or modified system files

          a user restarted a server

          unauthorised access to a server or computer.

        Cybersecurity incident

        An unwanted or unexpected cybersecurity event, or a series of such events, that either has compromised business
        operations or has a significant probability of compromising business operations.

        Examples of cybersecurity incidents include (but are not limited to):
          denial-of-service attacks

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  25

          unauthorised access or attempts to access a system

          compromise of sensitive data
          virus or malware outbreak (including ransomware).

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  26

        Appendix     B:  Cybersecurity      incident    response

        readiness    checklist

        This checklist is provided to aid the initial assessment of an organisation’s readiness to respond to a cybersecurity
        incident. This checklist is not an exhaustive list of all readiness activities.

         PREPARATION

              Your organisation has a cybersecurity policy or strategy that outlines your organisation’s approach to
              prevention, preparedness, detection, response, recovery, review and improvement. For example, your
          ☐
              organisation has a position on not paying ransoms, reporting cybersecurity incidents to government,
              publicly acknowledging cybersecurity incidents, and sharing information about cybersecurity incidents
              with trusted industry and government partners.
              A CIRP has been developed which:
               aligns with your organisation’s operating environment, including emergency management and
                business continuity processes and procedures
          ☐
               has been reviewed or tested in an exercise to ensure it is current and responsible personnel are aware
                of their roles and responsibilities
               includes supporting templates, for example situation reports.

          ☐   Personnel involved in managing cybersecurity incidents have received cybersecurity incident response
              training.

              Up-to-date hard copy versions of the CIRP and playbooks are stored in a secure location (in case of
          ☐
              electronic or hardware failure) and are accessible to authorised personnel.
              Specific playbooks to supplement the CIRP have been developed and define step-by-step guidance for
          ☐
              response actions to common cybersecurity incidents.
          ☐   A CIRT and SEMT, or equivalents, have been identified to manage any responses to cybersecurity
              incidents.

          ☐   All relevant IT and OT SOPs are documented and have been reviewed or tested in an exercise to ensure
              they are current and responsible personnel are aware of their roles and responsibilities.

              Arrangements for service providers, including cloud and managed services, to provide and retain logs
          ☐
              have been established and tested to ensure they include useful data which can be provided in a timely
              manner.
          ☐   Log retention mechanisms for critical systems, services and networks have been adequately configured
              and tested to ensure that they capture useful data.

              Your organisation has internal or third party arrangements and capabilities to detect and analyse
          ☐
              cybersecurity events/incidents. If these capabilities are outsourced, your organisation has an active
              service agreement/contract.

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  27

          ☐
              Critical assets (systems, services and networks) have been identified and documented.

              SOPs have been developed, and roles and responsibilities assigned, for use of facilities and
          ☐
              communications technologies in response to cybersecurity incidents, and these resources are confirmed
              as available. This includes for alternative/backup IT-based communication channels.
          ☐   Cybersecurity incident logging/records and tracking technologies used to manage any response to
              cybersecurity incidents are confirmed as available and have been tested.

          ☐
              Role cards have been developed for personnel involved in the CIRT and the SEMT.
              Your organisation has internal or third party arrangements and capabilities to monitor cyberthreats.
              Situational awareness information is collected from internal and external data sources, including:

               local system and network traffic and activity logs
          ☐
               news concerning political, social or economic activities that might impact cybersecurity incident
                activity
               external feeds on cybersecurity incident trends, new attack vectors, current attack indicators and new
                mitigation strategies and technologies.
         DETECTION, INVESTIGATION, ANALYSIS AND ACTIVATION

         SOPs have been developed, and roles and responsibilities assigned, for:

              Detection mechanisms which can be used to identify cybersecurity events/incidents, such as scanning,
              sensor and logging mechanisms. These mechanisms require monitoring processes to identify unusual or
              suspicious activity commensurate with the potential impact of a cybersecurity incident.
              Common monitoring techniques include:
               network and user profiling that establishes a baseline of normal activity which, when combined with
                logging and alerting mechanisms, can enable detection of anomalous activity
               scanning for the introduction of unauthorised hardware and software
          ☐
               scanning for unauthorised changes to hardware and software configurations
               sensors that provide an alert when a measure breaches a defined threshold(s) (e.g. device, server and
                network activity)
               logging and alerting of access to sensitive data or unsuccessful logon attempts to identify potential
                unauthorised access
               users with privileged access accounts subject to a greater level of monitoring in light of the heightened
                risks involved.

          ☐   Cybersecurity incident detection, including self-detected cybersecurity incidents, notifications received
              from service providers or vendors, and notifications received from trusted third parties (e.g. ASD).

          ☐   Cybersecurity incident analysis, including how cybersecurity incidents are to be categorised, classified
              and prioritised, and controls related to how data is stored and transmitted.

          ☐
              Activating a CIRT to manage cybersecurity incidents, with roles and responsibilities assigned.

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  28

          ☐
              Activating a SEMT to manage cybersecurity incidents, with roles and responsibilities assigned.

         CONTAINMENT, EVIDENCE COLLECTION AND REMEDIATION

          ☐   SOPs, playbooks and templates have been developed, and roles and responsibilities assigned, for
              containment, evidence collection and remediation.

              A secure location is available for storing data captured during cybersecurity incidents, which could be
          ☐
              used as evidence of the malicious actor’s tradecraft, and is ready to be provided to third-party
              stakeholders if requested.
         COMMUNICATIONS

              SOPs, playbooks and templates have been developed to support communicating with internal and
          ☐
              external stakeholders.
              SOPs, playbooks and templates for media and communications professionals have been developed, and
          ☐
              roles and responsibilities assigned, to support public and media messaging.
          ☐   You organisation has assigned a public and media spokesperson who is supported by technical subject
              matter experts.

          ☐   Personnel have been trained to implement communications processes and execute their roles and
              responsibilities.

              All personnel are cognisant of your organisation’s policy, and their responsibilities, when a cybersecurity
          ☐
              incident occurs (e.g. exercising discretion, using approved talking points, referring enquiries to the
              designated public and media spokesperson).
         CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING

              Processes and procedures are documented to support your organisation to meet its legal and regulatory
          ☐   requirements on cybersecurity incident notification and reporting with roles and responsibilities within
              your organisation assigned. This includes the processes for obtaining authority to release and share
              information.

          ☐
              Processes and procedures are documented for communicating with any cyber insurance providers.
         POST CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT REVIEW

              Processes are procedures are documented to support post cybersecurity incident reviews following the
          ☐
              resolution of cybersecurity incidents, with post cybersecurity incident review reports submitted to
              management for endorsement.

          ☐   Processes and procedures are documented to ensure actions following cybersecurity incidents and/or
              exercises are tracked and completed (e.g. within an action register).

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  29

        Appendix     C:  ASD   cybersecurity      incident   triage

        questions

        Where applicable, personnel reporting cybersecurity incidents to ASD on behalf of their organisation should try to
        have information available to answer the following questions:

          Who is reporting the cybersecurity incident? (e.g. CISO, SOC Manager)

          Who/what is the affected organisation/entity?

          What type of cybersecurity incident is being reported? (e.g. ransomware, denial of service, data breach,
           malware)
          Is the cybersecurity incident still active?

          When was the cybersecurity incident first identified?

          Is reporting for ASD awareness or is ASD assistance required?

            If ASD assistance is required, what assistance is required?

          What type of system, service or network has been affected?

          What was observed (e.g. the sequence of events)?

            date/time

            effect/event
          Who or what identified the problem?

          Has a data breach occurred?

            What type of data was exposed?

            What volume of data was exposed?

            What impact will this have on your organisation?

            What impact (if any) will the data breach have on public safety or services?

            Was it a misconfiguration/error, or was a malicious exfiltration or theft of data identified?

            If applicable under the Notifiable Data Breaches scheme, has it been reported to the OAIC?

          What actions have been taken to rectify the issue?

            Are internal or external cybersecurity incident response providers involved?
            Are business as usual operations interrupted? If so, how long before operations will be back to normal?

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  30

          Will information about the cybersecurity incident be communicating publicly (e.g. with customers and/or the
           media)?

            If so, please notify ASD beforehand if you will be referencing ASD.

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  31

        Appendix     D:  Situation    report   template

         Date of Entry:        Time of Entry:        Author:

         Date/time cybersecurity incident was
         detected

         Current cybersecurity incident status New, In Progress, Resolved

         Cybersecurity incident type

         Cybersecurity incident classification Critical, High, Medium, Low

                               List the affected systems, services and/or networks; highlight any change
         Cybersecurity incident scope
                               to scope since the previous log.
                               List the affected stakeholder(s); highlight any change in impact since the
         Cybersecurity incident impact
                               previous log entry.
                               Outline the impact of the cybersecurity incident on your organisation(s)
         Cybersecurity incident severity and public safety or services; highlight any change to severity since the
                               previous log entry.

                               What other organisations need to be notified? (e.g. ASD, law enforcement,
         Notifications Actioned/Pending
                               OAIC, customers, media)
                               What assistance is required from other organisations? (e.g. ASD, law
         Assistance required
                               enforcement)
         Actions being taken to resolve the
         cybersecurity incident

         Additional notes

         Contact details for the cybersecurity
         incident manager (and others if
         required)

         Date and time of the next update

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  32

        Appendix     E:  Cybersecurity      incident   log  template

         Date/Time    Notes (relevant facts, decisions, rationale)

         20220330 – 0835hrs SOC identified phishing that resulted in the successful deployment of ransomware to the system.

         20220331 – 1455hrs CIRT collected forensic artefacts (listed in the evidence register). An initial investigation has assessed the cybersecurity incident as ‘High’.
                      The following systems are currently offline: ...

         20220401 – 1150hrs SEMT voted to escalate the cybersecurity incident to ‘Critical’.
                      Next actions were agreed to as follows: …

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance                                    33

        Appendix     F: Evidence     register   template

         Date/Time and Collected by Item Details                        Storage Location and Label Access
         Location of  (name, title, contact (quantity, serial number, model number, hostname, MAC Number
         Collection   and phone number) address, IP addresses and hash values)

         20220402 – 1200hrs Jane Doe – CIRT – 1 x disk and memory image, XYZ Desktop, ABC Model Stored on hard drive asset number CIRT team, law
         – Head Office Contact Details Number, IP ###.###.###.###, ...  ####, in IT Security Office and on enforcement, ASD
                                                                        network drive H:\...

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance                                    34

        Appendix     G:  Remediation       action   plan   template

         Date/Time    Category      Action                              Action Owner         Status

                      (Contain, Eradicate,                                                   (Unallocated, In
                      Recover)                                                               Progress, Closed)

         20220425 – 0900hrs Contain Isolated hosts identified as infected per CIRT investigation. CIRT Team Leader In Progress

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance                                    35

        Appendix     H:  Post   cybersecurity     incident    reviews

        A post cybersecurity incident review is a detailed review conducted after an organisation has experienced a
        cybersecurity incident. The content of the review will vary for each organisation, but primarily focuses on establishing
        learnings and providing recommended actions to mitigate future cybersecurity incidents. The purpose of this guide is
        to provide organisations that have experienced a cybersecurity incident with tools and techniques to conduct a post
        cybersecurity incident review.

        How to use this guide

        This guide contains high level steps recommended for organisations to follow after experiencing a cybersecurity
        incident. The guide should be used as a resource, and will need to be further tailored by organisations to suit their
        individual requirements. The templates provided are generic and will need to be tailored to suit specific organisational
        requirements.

        Post cybersecurity incident review steps

        Step 1 – Hold cybersecurity incident debriefs

        Post cybersecurity incident debriefs are useful for capturing observations from personnel directly involved in
        managing a cybersecurity incident and identifying actions to improve how their organisation managed its response, as
        well as how the cybersecurity incident could have been prevented. There are two types of debriefs organisations may
        hold after experiencing a cybersecurity incident: a hot debrief and a formal debrief (also known as a cold debrief).

        A hot debrief is held immediately after an organisation has recovered its systems, services or networks from a
        cybersecurity incident. The benefits of holding a hot debrief include:
          the team involved in responding to the cybersecurity incident can provide instant feedback and lessons learned

          any urgent issues identified during the cybersecurity incident can be addressed immediately

          personnel involved in the cybersecurity incident are more likely to recall information and detail as it is still fresh
           in their minds.

        A formal debrief is held days to weeks after an organisation has recovered its systems, services or networks from a
        cybersecurity incident. The benefits of holding a formal debrief include:

          it provides an opportunity to discuss the cybersecurity incident in detail after it is resolved to gather key insights,
           learnings and opportunities for improvement

          it provides time between the cybersecurity incident and debrief allowing emotions to settle, particularly for
           stressful cybersecurity incidents
          it ensures all key personnel required for discussions are present, especially senior management who will need to
           drive the implementation of actions.

        Hot debrief guidance

        Time

        30 minutes – 1 hour.

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  36

        Aim

        The aim of the hot debrief is to review the cybersecurity incident, receive feedback on personnel observations and
        insights, and identify any urgent issues requiring immediate action.
        Participants

        The hot debrief should be led by a facilitator (such as a manager who was involved during the cybersecurity incident)
        and supported by a scribe whose role is to document attendance, key insights and immediate actions. It is
        recommended that hot debrief participants include all personnel involved during the detection, response and
        recovery phases of the cybersecurity incident, with upper management excluded (e.g. chief executive officers and
        general managers). This will ensure personnel involved in the cybersecurity incident can speak openly without fear of
        repercussion.

        Content

        The facilitator could guide discussion using the following questions:

          What went well?
          What could we do differently next time to improve?

          What action has been taken to remediate immediate risk?

          Are there any further issues that require immediate resolution?

        Note, it is essential for the facilitator to remain objective during the discussion, and treat the cybersecurity incident as
        a learning point for all involved, without attributing blame to an individual or team.

        Conclusion

        At the end of the hot debrief, the facilitator should provide a summary of the discussions to participants who can
        confirm whether the key issues and actions were captured. The facilitator should explain the next steps and the
        expected timeframes for these.
        Formal debrief guidance

        Time

        1–2 hours.

        Aim

        The aim of the formal debrief is to review the cybersecurity incident, validate what worked, and produce actions and
        assigned responsibilities to improve current arrangements.

        Participants

        The formal debrief should be led by a facilitator who asks key questions, supported by a scribe to document
        attendance, key insights and actions.

        It is recommended that formal debrief participants include:
          technical personnel who were involved in detecting, responding to and resolving the cybersecurity incident

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  37

          non-technical personnel who were involved during the cybersecurity incident

          communications/media personnel involved in the cybersecurity incident.
        Content

        Questions to consider in the formal debrief can be found in the post cybersecurity incident review analysis Template.
        The facilitator can use this guidance to lead the conversation with the participants while the scribe documents the
        discussion directly into the template. The scribe can also use the action register template to document any actions
        resulting from the discussion.

        Conclusion

        At the end of the debrief, a decision should be made about whether additional discussions are required, or if
        finalisation of the cybersecurity incident documentation can be completed. If email correspondence is selected to
        disseminate the documentation, an action officer will need to be identified for completing them and circulating them
        to staff for endorsement.

        Step 2 – Complete cybersecurity incident documentation

        Based on the findings of the debriefs, the action officer should complete a draft of the post cybersecurity incident
        review analysis and the action register and circulate them to the personnel involved in the debrief for their feedback
        and endorsement. Note, it is important that the action register details an assigned lead (action officer) for closing out
        each action.
        Once feedback is received and incorporated, documentation should be sent to an executive staff member (e.g. a chief
        executive officer or general manager) for endorsement. The executive staff member may advise their expectations on
        the frequency of progress reporting of agreed actions and nominate a person to lead tracking and reporting.

        Step 3 – Cybersecurity incident tracking and reporting

        The identified actions should be tracked and reported at agreed frequencies.

        Post cybersecurity incident review analysis template

         CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT SUMMARY

         Cybersecurity incident
         name

         Date of cybersecurity dd/mm/yyyy
         incident

         Cybersecurity incident Low/Medium/High
         priority         Established from the impact and/or risk to the business.

         Time cybersecurity incident
         occurred

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  38

         Time cybersecurity incident
         was resolved

         Cybersecurity incident type

         Personnel involved Names of the individuals involved in resolving the cybersecurity incident and their
                          functions(s), including any service providers.

         Cybersecurity incident What impact did the cybersecurity incident have (e.g. loss of systems, services or
         impact           networks).

         Brief summary    What happened?

        Cybersecurity incident analysis

        Cybersecurity incident analysis is broken into the following categories:

          Timeline: Summary of what happened and when. Provides high level areas for improvement.

          Protection: Identifies the control mechanisms that were in place at the time of the cybersecurity incident and
           their effectiveness. Establishes how to improve the protection of systems, services and networks.
          Detection: Establishes how to reduce the time to identify a cybersecurity incident. Addresses what detection
           mechanisms were in place and how those mechanisms could be improved.

          Response: Identifies improvements for the cybersecurity incident response.

          Recovery: Addresses improvements for cybersecurity incident recovery.

         TIMELINE

         Date and time of detection

         When was the cybersecurity When did the organisation identify that a cybersecurity incident was occurring?
         incident acknowledged?

         Date and time of
         cybersecurity incident
         response

         Date and time of
         cybersecurity incident
         recovery

         Who discovered the Or who was alerted to it first? How did the discovery or alert happen?
         cybersecurity incident first
         and how?

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  39

         Was the cybersecurity For example, did the organisation report it to ASD or the OAIC?
         incident reported externally?
         If yes, when?

         Who supported resolving the List the names of personnel involved in resolving the cybersecurity incident and the
         cybersecurity incident? When time (and date if not all on the same day) they joined in.
         did they provide support?

         What activities were It is easier to do this in a list. For example: Time > Task > Impact.
         conducted to resolved the
         cybersecurity incident? When
         were they conducted and
         what was their impact?

         PROPOSED ACTIONS  Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the action register.
                           Brief description of action > Proposed action officer.

         PROTECTION

         What controls were in place
         that were expected to stop a
         cybersecurity incident similar
         to this?

         How effective were those Did they work? Why/why not?
         controls?         How could they be improved?

         Are there other controls What are they?
         considered better for
         protecting against a similar
         cybersecurity incident?

         What business processes and
         procedures were in place to
         prevent this type of
         cybersecurity incident from
         occurring?

         How effective were those Did they work? Why/why not?
         business processes and How could they be improved?
         procedures?

         Any other findings and/or See the PPOSTTE model for guidance.
         suggestions for
         improvement?

         PROPOSED ACTIONS  Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the action register.
                           Brief description of action > Proposed action officer.

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  40

         DETECTION

         How was the cybersecurity How did the organisation know a cybersecurity incident was happening?
         incident detected?

         What controls were in place
         to detect the cybersecurity
         incident?

         Were those controls Did they work? Why/why not?
         effective?        How could they be improved?

         Are there any ways to How could the organisation reduce that time?
         improve the ‘time to
         detection’?
         Are there any indicators that
         can be used to detect similar
         cybersecurity incidents in the
         future?

         Are there any additional tools Is there anything from a detection perspective that would help mitigate future
         or resources that are cybersecurity incidents?
         required in the future to
         detect similar cybersecurity
         incidents?

         Any other findings and/or What activities worked well? What activities did not work so well? What could be
         suggestions for   changed with hindsight?
         improvement?      See the PPOSTTE model for guidance.

         PROPOSED ACTIONS  Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the action register.

                           Brief description of action > Proposed action officer.

         RESPONSE

         What was the cause of the
         cybersecurity incident?

         How was the cybersecurity What needed to happen for the cybersecurity incident to be resolved?
         incident resolved?

         What obstacles were faced
         when responding to the
         cybersecurity incident?

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  41

         Were any business processes For example, does the organisation have a CIRP, and was this followed?
         and procedures used in
         responding to the
         cybersecurity incident?

         Were those business Did they work? Why/why not?
         processes and procedures
         effective?

         What delays and obstacles
         were experienced when
         responding?

         Were there any escalation Were there any escalation points that the cybersecurity incident went through?
         points?

         If there were escalation For example, having to escalate to a chief operating officer to take action on an
         points, did they hamper the ongoing cybersecurity incident had severe timeline impacts for the response.
         response or were they at the
         appropriate level?

         How well did the information What worked well/what did not work well? How could it be improved?
         sharing and communications Was there any information that was needed sooner?
         work within your
                           How did the organisation communicate within the IR team, across jurisdictions,
         organisation?
                           across time zones, legal teams and external comms teams?
         Were there any media If yes, how did the organisation respond?
         enquiries received during the
         cybersecurity incident?
         Was media produced during If yes, what was the media that was produced?
         the cybersecurity incident?

         Were stakeholders and/or Why/why not? When? How?
         customers notified during the
                           Was it effective? How could it be improved?
         cybersecurity incident?
         Were trained personnel Are there any personnel knowledge and/or skills gaps? What are they?
         available to respond? Were there enough resources available to respond?

         Any other findings and/or See the PPOSTTE model for guidance.
         suggestions for
         improvement?

         PROPOSED ACTIONS  Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the action register.

                           Brief description of action > Proposed action officer.

         RECOVERY

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  42

         How long did it take for all
         systems, services and
         networks to recover?

         How could this time be For example, how could the recovery time be reduced?
         improved?

         Are there any obligations to If yes, to who?
         report externally about the
         cybersecurity incident?

         Were there any media If yes, how did the organisation respond?
         enquiries after the
         cybersecurity incident?

         Were stakeholders and/or Why/why not? When? How?
         customers notified following Was it effective? How could it be improved?
         the cybersecurity incident?

         Any other findings and/or See the PPOSTTE model for guidance.
         suggestions for
         improvement?

         PROPOSED ACTIONS  Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the action register.
                           Brief description of action > Proposed action officer.

        Cybersecurity incident response planning: Practitioner guidance  43