Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Appendix                   A

          Terminology        and   Definitions

          Use of consistent and pre-defined terminology to describe incidents and their effects can be helpful
          during a response. In your CIRP, include commonly used terms used in your organisation. ACSC defines
          cyber threats, events, alerts and incidents as follows:

          Cyber threat
          A cyber threat is any circumstance or event with the potential to harm systems or information.
          Other threats are listed on cyber.gov.au. Organisations can include a list of cyber threats of concern.
          The ACSC Annual Cyber Threat Report (2021) outlines the following threat environment and key cyber
          security trends:
          • COVID-19 themed malicious activity • Ransomware
          including phishing emails and scams • S oftware supply chain compromise

          • Exploitation of security vulnerabilities • C ybercrime
          • Business Email Compromise
          Cyber security event

          A cyber security event is an occurrence of a system, service or network state indicating a possible
          breach of security policy, failure of safeguards or a previously unknown situation that may be
          relevant to security.
          A cyber security event has the potential to become, but is not confirmed to be, a cyber incident.

          Examples of cyber security events include (but are not limited to):
          • A user has disabled the antivirus on their computer
          • A user has deleted or modified system files
          • A user restarted a server

          • Unauthorised access to a server or system.
          Cyber security alert

          A cyber security alert is a notification generated in response to a deviation from normal behaviour.
          Cyber security alerts are used to highlight cyber security events.
          Cyber incident

          A cyber incident is an unwanted or unexpected cyber security event, or a series of such events,
          that have a significant probability of compromising business operations. A cyber incident requires
          corrective action.
          Examples of cyber security incidents include (but are not limited to):
          • Denial-of-service attacks (DoS)
          • Unauthorised access or attempts to access a system

          • Compromise of sensitive information
          • Virus or malware outbreak (including ransomware).

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 31

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Appendix                   B

          Cyber    Incident     Response
          Readiness      Checklist

          This checklist is to aid your organisation’s initial assessment of its readiness to respond to a cyber
          security incident. This checklist is not an exhaustive list of all readiness activities.

           PREPARATION

                Your organisation has a cyber security policy or strategy that outlines your organisation’s approach
                to prevention, preparedness, detection, response, recovery, review and improvement.
                • For example, does your organisation have a position on paying ransom, reporting incidents to
                government, publicly acknowledging cyber incidents, sharing information about incidents with
                trusted industry and government partners?
                A Cyber Incident Response Plan has been developed, which:
                • Aligns with your organisation’s operating environment and other processes, including emergency
                management and business continuity processes.
                • Has been reviewed or tested in an exercise to ensure it remains current and responsible personnel
                are aware of their roles, responsibilities and processes.
                • Has prepared templates for information gathering, situation reports and other relevant events.

                Staff involved in managing an incident have received incident response training.

                Up-to-date hard copy versions of the Cyber Incident Response Plan and playbooks are stored
                in a secure location (in case of electronic or hardware failure) and are accessible to authorised
                staff members.

                Specific playbooks to supplement the Cyber Incident Response Plan have been developed that
                provide clear guidance for response actions to common incidents, roles and responsibilities.

                A Cyber Incident Response Team (CIRT) and a Senior Executive Management Team (SEMT)
                – or equivalents – have been formed to manage the response, with approved authorities.
                All relevant IT and OT Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are documented and have
                been reviewed or tested in an exercise to ensure they remain current and responsible personnel
                are aware of their roles, responsibilities and processes.

     32 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Cyber    Incident     Response

          Readiness      Checklist

                Arrangements for service providers, including cloud and software as a service, to provide and retain
                logs have been established and tested to ensure these include useful data and can be provided in a
                timely manner.
                Log retention for critical systems have been configured adequately and tested to confirm that
                they capture useful data. Refer to the ACSC publications including Windows Event Logging and
                Forwarding for specific guidance.

                Your organisation has internal or third party arrangements and capabilities to detect
                and analyse incidents. If these capabilities are outsourced, your organisation has an active
                service agreement/contract.

                Critical assets (data, applications and systems) have been identified and documented.

                Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been developed, and roles and responsibilities
                assigned for use of facilities and communications technologies in response to cyber incidents,
                and these resources are confirmed as available. This includes alternative/back-up ICT-based
                channels.
                Incident logging/records and tracking technologies used to manage a response are confirmed
                as available and have been tested.

                Role cards have been developed for each person involved in the CIRT and the SEMT.
                Individual actions will depend on the type and severity of the incident. Example role card
                is available at Appendix J.

                Your organisation has internal or third party arrangements and capabilities to monitor threats.
                Situational awareness information is collected from internal and external data sources, including:
                • Local system and network traffic and activity logs
                • News feeds concerning ongoing political, social, or economic activities that might
                impact incident activity
                • External feeds on incident trends, new attack vectors, current attack indicators and new mitigation
                strategies and technologies.

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 33

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Cyber    Incident     Response

          Readiness      Checklist

           DETECTION, INVESTIGATION, ANALYSIS AND ACTIVATION

           Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been developed, and roles and responsibilities assigned for:

                Detection mechanisms typically include scanning, sensing and logging mechanisms which can be
                used to identify potential cyber security events and incidents. Monitoring processes could include
                the identification of unusual patterns of behaviour and logging that facilitates investigation and
                preserves forensic evidence. Monitoring processes would consider the broad set of events, ranging
                from the physical hardware layer to higher order business activities such as payments and changes
                to user access. Common monitoring techniques include:
                • Network and user profiling that establishes a baseline of normal activity which, when combined
                with logging and alerting mechanisms, can enable detection of anomalous activity;
                • Scanning for unauthorised hardware, software and changes to configurations;
                • Sensors that provide an alert when a measure breaches a defined threshold(s) (e.g. device,
                server and network activity);
                • Logging and alerting of access to sensitive data or unsuccessful logon attempts to identify
                potential unauthorised access; and
                • Users with privileged access accounts subject to a greater level of monitoring in light of the
                heightened risks involved.
                Incident detection, including self-detected incidents, notifications received from service providers
                or vendors, and notifications received from trusted third parties (e.g. ACSC).

                Incident analysis, including how incidents are to be categorised, classified and prioritised, and
                controls related to how data is stored and transmitted (i.e. if out-of-band transmission is required).
                Activating a Cyber Incident Response Team (CIRT) to manage critical incidents, with roles and
                responsibilities assigned.

                Activating a Senior Executive Management Team (SEMT) to manage critical incidents,
                with roles and responsibilities assigned.

           CONTAINMENT, EVIDENCE COLLECTION AND REMEDIATION

                Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), playbooks and templates, have been developed, and roles
                and responsibilities assigned for containment, evidence collection and remediation. These can be
                included as appendices to the Cyber Incident Response Plan.

                A secure location is available for storing data captured during an incident, which could be used
                as evidence of the incident and the adversary’s tradecraft, and ready to be provided to third-party
                stakeholders if needed.

          4 APRA Prudential Practice Guide CPG 234 Information Security.

     34 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Cyber    Incident     Response

          Readiness      Checklist

           COMMUNICATIONS

                Policy, plans, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and templates have been developed to support
                communicating with:
                – Internal stakeholders (e.g. Board, staff)
                – External stakeholders (e.g. stakeholders to assist with the response and stakeholders
                 with an interest in the response).

                Policy, plans, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and templates for media and communications
                professionals have been developed, and roles and responsibilities assigned, to support public and
                media messaging.
                You organisation has assigned a public and media spokesperson, who is supported by subject
                matter experts.

                Staff have been trained to implement the communications processes and execute their roles
                and responsibilities.

                Staff who are not involved in managing incidents are cognisant of your organisation’s policy and
                processes and their responsibilities when an incident occurs (e.g. exercising discretion, using
                approved talking points, referring enquiries to the designated officer).
           INCIDENT NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING

                Processes, roles,responsibilities and contact details are assigned and documented to support the
                organisation to meet its legal and regulatory requirements on cyber incident notification, reporting
                and response. This includes the processes for obtaining authority to release and share information.
                Processes are documented for insurance requirements.

           POST INCIDENT REVIEW

                A process is documented to conduct Post Incident Reviews (PIR) following conclusion of an incident
                and PIR reports with recommendations are submitted to management for endorsement.
                A process is documented to ensure actions following incidents and/or exercises are tracked and
                completed (e.g. Action Register).

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 35

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Appendix                   C

          ACSC    Incident     Triage    Questions

          Where applicable, personnel reporting cyber security incidents to the ACSC on behalf of their
          organisation should try to have information available to answer the following questions:

          • Who is reporting the incident? (include their position e.g. CISO, ITSA, SOC Manager etc.)
          • Who/what is the affected organisation/entity?
          • What type of incident is being reported? (e.g. ransomware, denial of service, data exposure, malware)

          • Is the incident still active?
          • When was the incident first identified?
          • Are you reporting for ACSC awareness or is ACSC assistance required?
               – If ACSC assistance is required, what assistance is needed?

          • What type of system or network has been affected?
               – Information Technology (IT)
                 • Corporate systems/networks, databases, servers, VOIP systems.
               – Operational Technology (OT)
                 • SCADA, Remote sensors, BMS/BAS, logic controllers.

          • What was observed (the sequence of events)? E.g. was lateral movement observed?
               – Date/Time
               – Effect/Event
          • Who or what identified the problem?

          • Has a data breach occurred?
               – What type of information was exposed?
                 • What impact will this have on the organisation?
                 • What impact (if any) will the breach have on public safety or services?
               – What volume of records/data was exposed?
               – Was it a misconfiguration/error, or was a malicious exfiltration or theft of data identified?
               – Has it been reported to the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC)?
                 • If not, organisations need to consider if mandatory reporting obligations apply under
                 the Notifiable Data Breach (NDB) scheme
          • What actions have been taken to rectify the issue?
               – Does the organisation/entity have internal or external IT and/or cyber security incident
                response providers?

               – Are services/business as usual operations interrupted?
                 • If so, how long do they expect before they are back at normal operating capability?
          • Will you be communicating publicly about the incident and engaging with media?
               – If so, please notify the ACSC beforehand if you will be referencing the ACSC.

     36 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Appendix                   D

          Situation     Report     Template

           Date of entry:        Time of entry:     Author:

           Date and Time incident detected 20220125 – 1350hrs AEST

           Current Status – New, In Progress,
                                 In Progress
           Resolved
           Incident Type         Ransomware or phishing or DDoS, etc.

           Incident Classification Major or Critical or Routine, etc.

           Scope – list the affected networks,
           systems and/or applications; Payroll, IT management systems.
           highlight any change to scope As of 20220126: Point of Sale, customer management, etc.
           since the previous log

           Impact – list the affected
                                 The internal stakeholders affected are:
           stakeholder(s); highlight any
                                 Human Resources, service desk.
           change in impact since the
                                 As of 20220126: Customer relations, Sales, etc.
           previous log entry
           Severity – outline the impact of
           the incident on your organisation(s)
                                 As of 20220126: Unable to conduct BAU operations,
           and public safety or services;
                                 resulting in a catastrophic impact to business
           highlight any change to severity
           since the previous log entry
           Assistance required –
           what assistance do we require Have notified the ACSC and provided artefacts.
           from other organisations? Engaged with Law enforcement due to ransomware
           (e.g. ACSC, law enforcement)
           Actions taken to resolve incident Current actions being taken by the CIRT
           Additional notes
           Contact details for incident
                                 CIRT Manager – Contact details
           manager and others if required
           Date and Time of next update

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 37

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

     38 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance
         E
         xidneppA
                 etalpmeT
                 goL
                 tnedicnI
                        )elanoitar
                        ,snoisiced
                        ,stcaf
                        tnaveler(
                        setoN
                        emiT
                        ,etaD
                             krowten
                             ot
                             erawmosnar
                             fo
                             tnemyolped
                             lufsseccus
                             eht
                             ni
                             detluser
                             taht
                             gnihsihp
                             defiitnedi
                             COS
                             srh5380
                             –
                             0330
                             2202
                                 .tnedicni
                                 rojam
                                 a
                                 sa
                                 tnedicni
                                 eht
                                 dessessa
                                 sah
                                 noitagitsevni
                                 laitini
                                 dna
                                 )retsigeR
                                 ecnedivE
                                 ni
                                 detsil(
                                 stcafetra
                                 cisnerof
                                 detcelloc
                                 TRIC
                                  srh5541
                                  –
                                  1330
                                  2202
                                   ...
                                   :eniflfo
                                   ro
                                   dedarged
                                   yltnerruc
                                   era
                                   smetsys
                                   gniwollof
                                   ehT
                                       :swollof
                                       sa
                                       ,ot
                                       deerga
                                       erew
                                       snoitca
                                       txeN
                                       .”lacitirC“
                                       ot
                                       tnedicni
                                       etalacse
                                       ot
                                       detov
                                       TMES
                                       TSEA
                                       srh0511
                                       –
                                       1040
                                       2202

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 39
         F
         xidneppA
                 etalpmeT
                 retsigeR
                 ecnedivE
                        sseccA
                        noitacol
                        egarotS
                        sliateD
                        metI
                        yb
                        detcelloC
                        emiT
                        ,etaD
                          rebmun
                          lebal
                          dna
                          ,rebmun
                          ledom
                          ,rebmun
                          laires
                          ,ytitnauq(
                          dna
                          tcatnoc
                          ,eltit
                          ,eman(
                          noitacoL
                          dna
                           ,sserdda
                           )CAM(
                           lortnoc
                           ssecca
                           aidem
                           ,emantsoh
                           )rebmun
                           enohp
                           noitcelloc
                           fo
                             )seulav
                             hsah
                             dna
                             sesserdda
                             PI
                                tessA
                                DDH
                                no
                                derotS
                                 wal
                                 ,maet
                                 TRIC
                                 ,egami
                                 yromem
                                 dna
                                 ksid
                                 x
                                 1
                                  TI
                                  ni
                                  ,####
                                  rebmuN
                                  TRIC
                                  –
                                  eoD
                                  enaJ
                                  srh0021
                                  –
                                  2040
                                  2202
                                   ,tnemecrofne
                                   ,rebmuN
                                   ledoM
                                   CBA
                                   ,potkseD
                                   ZYX
                                   no
                                   dna
                                   ecfifO
                                   ytiruceS
                                   sliateD
                                   tcatnoC
                                   –
                                   ecfifO
                                   daeH
                                   –
                                    CSCA
                                    ...
                                    ,###.###.###.###
                                    PI
                                     ...\:H
                                     evird
                                     krowten

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

     40 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance
         G
         xidneppA
                 etalpmeT
                 nalP
                 noitcA
                 noitaidemeR
                        sutatS
                        renwO
                        noitcA
                        noitcA
                        yrogetaC
                        emiT
                        dna
                        etaD
                          nI
                          ,detacollanU(
                          )revoceR
                          ,etacidarE
                          ,niatnoC(
                           )desolC
                           ,ssergorP
                                ,detcefni
                                sa
                                defiitnedi
                                stsoh
                                etalosI
                                 ssergorP
                                 nI
                                 redaeL
                                 maeT
                                 TRIC
                                 niatnoC
                                 srh0090
                                 –
                                 5240
                                 2202
                                  .noitagitsevni
                                  TRIC
                                  rep

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Appendix                   H

          Post   Incident    Review     Guide
          and   Analysis     Template

          A Post Incident Review (PIR) is a detailed review conducted after an organisation has experienced a
          cyber security incident. The content of the review will vary for each organisation, but primarily focuses
          on establishing learnings and providing recommended actions to mitigate future incidents. The
          purpose of this document is to provide organisations that have experienced a cyber security incident
          with tools and techniques to conduct a PIR in order to identify areas to improve their cyber security
          posture.

          How to use the guide
          The guide contains high level steps recommended for organisations to follow after experiencing a
          cyber security incident. The guide should be used as a resource, and will need to be further tailored by
          organisations to suit and meet their individual requirements. The templates are generic documents,
          and will need to be tailored to suit specific organisational requirements.
          This guide and the templates were informed by private industry and government resources.

          Post Incident Review Steps

          Step 1 – Hold incident debriefs
          Post incident debriefs are useful for capturing observations from personnel directly involved in
          managing a cyber security incident and identifying actions to improve how the organisation managed
          the response, as well as how the incident could have been prevented.
          There are two types of debriefs organisations may hold after experiencing a cyber security incident:
          a hot debrief and a formal debrief (or cold debrief).

          A hot debrief is held immediately after an organisation has recovered its networks and systems from
          a cyber security incident
          The benefits of holding a hot debrief include:
          • The team involved in responding to the incident is available to provide instant feedback and lessons
          learned.

          • Any urgent issues identified during the incident can be addressed immediately.
          • Personnel involved in the incident are more likely to recall information and detail as it is still fresh
          in their minds.

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 41

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          A formal debrief is held days to weeks after an organisation has recovered its networks and systems
          after a cyber security incident.
          The benefits of holding a formal debrief include:
          • It provides an opportunity for an organisation to discuss the cyber security incident in detail after it
          is resolved to gather key insights, learnings and opportunities for improvement.

          • It enables time between the incident and debrief, providing time for emotions to settle, particularly
          for stressful incidents.
          • It ensures all key personnel required for the discussion are present, especially senior management
          who will need to drive the implementation of actions.
          The material below provides high-level guidance on how organisations can hold both types of debrief.

          Hot debrief guidance
          Time:

          30 minutes – 1 hour*
          *Timing may depend on the complexity of the incident and the personnel involved.
          Aim:

          The aim of the hot debrief is to review the incident, receive feedback on personnel observations and
          insights, and identify any urgent issues requiring immediate action.
          Participants:
          The debrief should be led by a manager who was involved during the incident, supported by a scribe
          whose role is to document attendance, key insights and immediate actions. It is recommended that
          debrief participants include all personnel involved during the detection, response and recovery
          phases of the incident, and upper management are excluded (i.e. CEOs and general managers).
          This will ensure personnel involved in the incident can speak openly without fear of repercussion.
          Content:

          The manager could guide discussion using the following questions:
          1. What went well?
          2. What could personnel and teams do differently next time to improve?

          3. What action has been taken to remediate immediate risk? Are there any further issues that require
            immediate resolution?
          Note, it is essential for the manager to remain objective during the discussion, and treat the incident
          as a learning point for all involved, without attributing blame to an individual or a team.
          Conclusion:

          At the end of the debrief, the manager should provide a summary of the discussions to participants
          who can confirm whether the key issues and actions were captured. The manager should explain
          the next steps, following the debrief, and the expected timeframes for these.

     42 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          Formal debrief guidance
          Time:

          1–2 hours.
          Aim:
          The aim of the formal debrief is to review the incident, validate what worked and produce actions
          and assigned responsibilities to improve the current arrangements.

          Participants:
          The debrief should be led by a facilitator who asks key questions, supported by a scribe to document
          key insights and actions.
          It is recommended that debrief participants include:

          • technical personnel who were involved in detecting, responding to, and resolving the incident
          • non-technical personnel who were involved during the incident (at minimum – one staff member
          from each function)
          • communications/media personnel involved in the incident.

          Content:
          Questions to consider in the debrief can be found at the Post Incident Review Analysis Template.
          The facilitator can use this document to lead the conversation with the participants, while the scribe
          documents the discussion directly into the Analysis template. The scribe can also use the Action
          Register Template to document any actions resulting from the discussion.
          Conclusion:
          At the end of the debrief, a decision should be made about whether additional discussions are required,
          or if finalisation of the incident documents can be completed. If email correspondence is selected
          to disseminate the documents, an action officer will need to be identified for completing them and
          circulating them to staff for endorsement.

          Step 2 – Complete incident documentation
          Based on the findings of the debriefs, the action officer should complete a draft of the Post Incident
          Review Analysis and the Action Register, and circulate them to the personnel involved in the hot debrief
          for their feedback and endorsement. Note, it is important that the Action Register details an assigned
          lead (action officer) for closing out each action.
          Once feedback is received and incorporated, the documents should be sent to an executive staff
          member (a CEO or general manager, or equivalent) for endorsement. The executive staff member may
          advise on their expectations on the frequency of progress reporting of agreed actions, and nominate
          a staff member to lead the reporting/tracking.

          Step 3 – Incident tracking and reporting
          The identified actions should be tracked and reported at agreed frequencies by the nominated
          staff member.

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 43

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

          PIR  Analysis      Template

           INCIDENT SUMMARY

           Incident name

           Date of incident    dd/mm/yy

           Incident Priority   Low/Medium/High

                               Established from the impact and/or risk to the business

           Time incident occurred

           Time incident was resolved

           Incident type       Malware, etc.

           Personnel involved  Names of the individuals involved in resolving the incident and their
                               function(s), including any service providers

           Incident impact     What impact did the incident have? I.e. loss of systems

           Brief summary       What happened?

          Incident Analysis
          The Incident Analysis is broken into the following categories:

          • Incident timeline – Summary of what happened and when. Provides high level areas for improvement.
          • Protection – Identifies the protection mechanisms that were in place at the time of the incident and
          their effectiveness. Establishes how to improve the protection of our systems and networks.
          • Detection – Establishes how to reduce the time to identify an incident is occurring. Addresses what
          detection mechanisms were in place, and how those mechanisms can be improved.
          • Response – Identifies improvements for the incident response.

          • Recovery – Addresses improvements for incident recovery (i.e. how to recover from an incident faster).

     44 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

           INCIDENT TIMELINE

           Date and time of detection

           When was the incident When did your organisation identify that an incident was occurring?
           acknowledged?

           Date and time
           of incident response

           Date and time
           of incident recovery

           Who discovered the incident Or who was alerted to it first? How did the discovery or alert happen?
           first and how?

           Was the incident reported For example, did your organisation report it to the ACSC?
           externally? If yes, when?

           Who supported resolving List the names of personnel involved in resolving the incident, and the time
           the incident? When did they (and date if not all on the same day) they joined in.
           provide support?
           What activities were It is easier to do this in a list, for example:
           conducted to resolve the Time > Task > Impact
           incident? When were they
           conducted and what was
           their impact?

           PROPOSED ACTIONS    Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the Action
                               Register. Brief description of action > Proposed Action Officer

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 45

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

           PROTECTION

           What controls were in place i.e. systems, networks, etc.
           that were expected to stop
           an incident similar to this?

           How effective were  Did they work? Why/why not?
           those controls?     How could they be improved?

           Are there other controls What are they?
           considered better for
           protecting against
           a similar incident?

           What business processes i.e. Your organisation’s policies and procedures.
           were in place to prevent
           this type of incident
           from occurring?

           How effective were those Did they work? Why/why not?
           business processes? How could they be improved?

           Any other findings and/ **See the PPOSTTE model for guidance
           or suggestions for
           improvement?

           PROPOSED ACTIONS    Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the Action
                               Register. Brief description of action > Proposed Action Officer

     46 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

           INCIDENT DETECTION

           How was the incident How did you know the incident was happening?
           detected?

           What controls were in place
           to detect the incident?

           Were those controls Did they work? Why/why not?
           effective?

           Are there any ways  How could your organisation reduce that time?
           to improve the
           ‘time-to-detection’?

           Are there any indicators
           that can be used to detect
           similar incidents in the
           future?
           Are there any additional Is there anything (from a detection perspective) that will help mitigate
           tools or resources that are future incidents?
           required in the future to Technology? Human resources with specific skills? Etc.
           detect similar incidents?

           Any other findings and/ What activities worked well? What activities did not work so well? What
           or suggestions for  could be changed with hindsight?
           improvement?        **Also see the PPOSTTE model for guidance

           PROPOSED ACTIONS    Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the Action
                               Register. Brief description of action > Proposed Action Officer

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 47

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

           INCIDENT RESPONSE

           What was the cause
           of the incident?

           How was the incident What needed to happen for the issue to be resolved?
           resolved?

           What obstacles were
           faced when responding
           to the incident?

           Were any business policies For example, does your organisation have an Incident Response Plan,
           and/or procedures used in and was this followed?
           responding to the incident?

           Were those business policies Did they work? Why/why not?
           and/or procedures effective?

           What delays and obstacles
           were experienced when
           responding?

           Were there any escalation Were there any escalation points that the incident went through?
           points?

           If there were escalation For example, having to escalate to a Chief Operating Officer (COO) to take
           points, did they hamper the action on an ongoing incident had severe timeline impacts on responding
           response OR were they at to an active incident.
           the appropriate level?

           How well did the    What worked well/what did not work well. How could it be improved?
           information sharing and Was there any information that was needed sooner?
           communications work
                               How did your organisation communicate within the IR team, across
           within your organisation?
                               jurisdictions, across time zones, legal teams, external comms teams, etc.?
           Were there any media If yes, WHAT was the media, and how did your organisation respond?
           enquiries received during
           the incident?

     48 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

           INCIDENT RESPONSE

           Was media produced during If yes, WHAT was the media, and how did your organisation respond?
           the incident?

           Was the customer notified Why/why not? When? How?
           during the incident?

           Were trained staff available Are there any staff knowledge and/or skills gaps? What are they?
           to respond?         Were there enough resources available to respond?

           Any other findings and/ **See the PPOSTTE model for guidance
           or suggestions for
           improvement?

           PROPOSED ACTIONS    Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the Action
                               Register. Brief description of action > Proposed Action Officer

                                                       Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance 49

          Cyber Incident Response Plan

           INCIDENT RECOVERY

           How long did it take for
           all systems and networks
           to recover?

           How could this time For example, how could the recovery time be reduced?
           be improved?

           Are there any obligations
           to report externally about
           the incident?

           Were there any media
           enquiries after the incident?

           Were staff and/or customers Why/why not?
           notified of the incident? How was the notification completed? Was it effective? How could it be
                               improved?

           Any other findings  **See the PPOSTTE model for guidance
           and/or suggestions
           for improvement?

           PROPOSED ACTIONS    Detail any resulting actions that can be incorporated into the Action
                               Register. Brief description of action > Proposed Action Officer

     50 Cyber Incident Response Plan | Guidance