BAER EP RYEOPUA RREEDA  DFOY RF OAR   A

                                             FLOOD?
                                            FLOOD

                                        Flooding     is a  temporary
                                       Failing  to evacuate   flooded
                                      areas,  entering   flood waters,
                                        that  is  normally    dry.   It is
                                        or remaining    after a flood
                                       the  most    common       natural
                                         has  passed   can  result  in
                                              injury  or death.
           FEMA V-1005/March 2018

         Flooding is a
      temporary overflow
       of water onto land
        that is normally
       dry. It is the most
       common natural Results from rain, snow, coastal Develops slowly or Causes outages, disrupts
       disaster in the U.S. storms, storm surge, and overflows quickly. Flash floods can transportation, damages
                     of dams and other water systems come with no warning buildings, creates landslides
                  IF  YOU’RE    UNDER      A FLOOD      WARNING
               IF YOU    ARE   UNDER      A  FLOOD     WARNING,
                      SEEK     SHELTER        RIGHT     AWAY
                    FIND   SAFE    SHELTER      RIGHT    AWAY

             Do not walk, swim or drive
                                                     Determine your best protection
                Do not walk, swim,                   Stay off bridges
                                                     based on the likely type/s of
            Just 6 inches of fast moving
        or drive through flood waters.               over fast-moving water.
         water can knock you down, and
                                                     management plans
           one foot of moving water can
              sweep your vehicle away.
                                                    Move to higher ground/
                       Evacuate
                   if told to do so.               Evacuate if told to do so.
      Determine your best protection
                                                   M o S v t e a y to w h h ig e h r e e r y g o r u o u a n r d e or a higher floor.
        based on the type of flooding.
                                                   Stay where you are.

          HOW               TO         STAY              SAFE

                  WHEN        A  FLOOD        THREATENS

           Prepare                   Survive                   Be  Safe

             NOW                     DURING                    AFTER

     Know your area’s type of flood risk. Depending on where you are, and Pay attention to authorities for
     Visit FEMA’s Flood Map Service the impact and the warning time of information and instructions.
     Center at https://msc.fema.gov/ flooding, go to the safe location that
     portal for information.  you have identified.      Avoid driving, except in
                                                        emergencies.
     Sign up for your community’s If told to evacuate, do so
     warning system. The Emergency Alert immediately. Never drive around Be aware that snakes and other
     System (EAS) and National Ocea nic barricades. Local responders use them animals may be in your house. Wear
     and Atmospheric Administration to safely direct traffic out of flooded heavy gloves and boots during
     (NOAA) Weather Radio also provide areas.           clean up.
     emergency alerts.
                              Listen to EAS, NOAA Weather Avoid wading in floodwater, which
     If flash flooding is a risk in your Radio, or local alerting systems can contain dangerous debris and
     location, monitor potential signs such for current emergency information be contaminated. Underground
     as heavy rain.           and instructions.         or downed power lines can also
                                                        electrically charge the water.
     Learn and practice evacuation Do not walk, swim, or drive through
     routes, shelter plans, and flash flood waters. Turn Around. Don’t Use a generator or other gasoline-
     flood response.          Drown.® Just six inches of fast-moving powered machinery ONLY outdoors
                              water can knock you down, and one and away from windows.
     Gather supplies in case you have to foot of moving water can sweep your
     leave immediately or if services are vehicle away. Be aware of the risk of electrocution.
     cut off. Keep in mind each person’s                Do not touch electrical equipment
     specific needs, including medication. Stay off of bridges over fast-moving if it is wet or if you are standing in
     Don’t forget the needs of pets. water. Fast-moving water can wash water. If it is safe to do so, turn off the
     Obtain extra batteries and charging bridges away without warning. electricity to prevent electric shock.
     devices for phones and other critical
     equipment.               If your vehicle is trapped in rapidly
                              moving water, stay inside. If water is
     Obtain flood insurance. Homeowner’s rising inside the vehicle, seek refuge
     policies do not cover flooding. Get on the roof.
     flood coverage under the National
     Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). If trapped in a building, go to its
                              highest level. Do not climb into
     Keep important documents in a closed attic. You may become
     a waterproof container. Create trapped by rising floodwater. Go on
                                                          Take an Active Role
     password-protected digital copies. the roof only if necessary. Signal for
                              help.                          in Your Safety
     Protect your property. Move valued
     items to higher levels. Declutter drains              Go to Ready.gov/floods.
     and gutters. Install check valves.                   Download the FEMA app to
     Consider a sump pump with a battery.
                                                          get more information about
                                                            preparing for a flood.
                                        FEMA V-1005