BE   PREPARED           FOR     AN

                                EARTHQUAKE

                                        Earthquakes     can  collapse
                                        buildings  and  cause   heavy

                                         items  to fall, resulting in

                                     injuries  and  property   damage.

           FEMA V-1003/May 2018

        Earthquakes are the
      sudden, rapid shaking of
       the earth, caused by the
       breaking and shifting of
        underground rock. Can happen anywhere. Higher Give no Cause fires and Cause tsunamis,
                        risk areas are California, Alaska, warning damage roads landslides, and
                          and the Mississippi Valley                  avalanches
                     IF  AN  EARTHQUAKE          HAPPENS,

                   PROTECT       YOURSELF       RIGHT     AWAY

          If in a vehicle, If in bed, If outdoors,  Do not get in Do not run
        pull over and stop. stay there. stay outdoors. a doorway.  outside.

          HOW               TO         STAY              SAFE

     WHEN          AN     EARTHQUAKE                   THREATENS

           Prepare                   Survive                   Be  Safe
             NOW                     DURING                    AFTER

     Secure items such as televisions and Drop, Cover, and Hold On like you Expect aftershocks to follow the
     objects that hang on walls. Store practiced. Drop to your hands and largest shock of an earthquake
     heavy and breakable objects on low knees. Cover your head and neck sequence.
     shelves.                  with your arms. Hold on to any
                               sturdy furniture until the shaking Check yourself for injury.
     Practice Drop, Cover, and Hold On stops. Crawl only if you can reach
     with family and coworkers. Drop to better cover without going through If in a damaged building, go
     your hands and knees. Cover your an area with more debris. outside and quickly move away
     head and neck with your arms. Crawl                from the building.
     only as far as needed to reach cover If in bed, stay there and cover your
                                                        Do not enter damaged buildings.
     from falling materials. Hold on to head and neck with a pillow.
     any sturdy furniture until the shaking
                                                        If you are trapped, send a text or
     stops.                    If inside, stay there until the shaking
                                                        bang on a pipe or wall. Cover your
                               stops. DO NOT run outside.
                                                        mouth for protection and instead of
     Create a family emergency
     communication plan that has an If in a vehicle, stop in a clear shouting, use a whistle.
     out-of-state contact. Plan where to area that is away from buildings,
                                                        If you are in an area that may
     meet if you get separated. trees, overpasses, underpasses, or
                                                        experience tsunamis, go inland or to
                               utility wires.
                                                        higher ground immediately after the
     Make a supply kit that includes
     enough food and water for several If you are in a high-rise building, shaking stops.
     days, a flashlight, a fire extinguisher, expect fire alarms and sprinklers to
                                                        Save phone calls for emergencies.
     and a whistle. Consider each person’s go off. Do not use elevators.
     specific needs, including medication.
                                                        Wear sturdy shoes and work gloves.
                               If near slopes, cliffs, or mountains,
     Do not forget the needs of pets.
                               be alert for falling rocks and
     Have extra batteries and charging
                               landslides.
     devices for phones and other critical
     equipment.
     Consider earthquake insurance
     policies. Standard homeowner’s
                                                             Take an Active
     insurance does not cover
                                                          Role in Your Safety
     earthquake damage.
                                                              Go to Ready.gov/
     Consider a retrofit of your building
     if it has structural issues that make                  earthquakes. Download
     it vulnerable to collapse during                        the FEMA app to get
     an earthquake.                                           more information
                                                            about preparing for an
                                                                earthquake.
                                        FEMA V-1003