To avoid CO poisoning when using generators:
     Portable  Generator   Hazards
                                                 Never run generators indoors, including
                                                  garages, basements, crawlspaces and sheds.
   Portable generators are useful when temporary or remote electric  Get to fresh air right away if you start to
   power is needed, but they also can be hazardous. The primary
                                                  feel dizzy or weak.
   hazards to avoid when using a generator are carbon monoxide
   (CO) poisoning from the toxic engine exhaust, electric shock or
   electrocution, fire and burns.           with battery back-up in your home, according to the
                                            manufacturer’s instructions. CO alarms should be certified
   Every year, people die in incidents related to portable generator to the requirements of the latest safety standards (UL 2034,
   use. Most of the incidents associated with portable generators IAS 6-96, or CSA 6.19.01). Test batteries monthly.
   reported to CPSC involve CO poisoning from generators used
   indoors or in partially-enclosed spaces. Electrical Hazards
   Carbon Monoxide Hazards                 Generators pose a risk of shock and electrocution, especially if
                                            they are operated in wet conditions. If you must use a generator
   When used in a confined space, generators can produce high when it is wet outside, protect the generator from moisture to help
   levels of CO within minutes. When you use a portable generator, avoid the shock/electrocution hazard, but do so without operating
   remember that you cannot see or smell CO. Even if you do not the generator indoors or near openings to any building that can be
   smell exhaust fumes, you may still be exposed to CO. occupied in order to help avoid the CO hazard. Operate the
                                            generator under an open, canopy-like structure on a dry surface
                                            where water cannot reach it or puddle or drain under it. Dry your
                                            hands, if wet, before touching the generator.
                                           Connect appliances to the generator using heavy-duty extension
                                            cords that are specifically designed for outdoor use. Make sure the
                                            wattage rating for each cord exceeds the total wattage of all
                                            appliances connected to it. Use extension cords that are long
                                            enough to allow the generator to be placed outdoors and far away
                                            from windows, doors and vents to the home or to other structures
                                            that could be occupied. Check that the entire length of each cord
                                            is free of cuts or tears and that the plug has all three prongs.
                                            Protect the cord from getting pinched or crushed if it passes
   Danger labels are required on all portable generators
                                            through a window or doorway.
   manufactured or imported on or after May 14, 2007.
                                           NEVER try to power the house wiring by plugging the generator
   If you start to feel sick, dizzy, or weak while using a generator,
                                            into a wall outlet, a practice known as “backfeeding.” This is
   get to fresh air RIGHT AWAY. DO NOT DELAY. The CO
                                            extremely dangerous and presents an electrocution risk to utility
   from generators can rapidly kill you.
                                            workers and neighbors served by the same utility transformer. It
                                            also bypasses some of the built-in household circuit protection
   Follow these safety tips to protect against CO poisoning. devices.
     NEVER use a generator inside homes, garages, crawlspaces, Fire Hazards
      sheds, or similar areas, even when using fans or opening
      doors and windows for ventilation. Deadly levels of carbon
                                          Never store fuel for your generator in the home. Gasoline, propane,
      monoxide can quickly build up in these areas and can linger
                                           kerosene, and other flammable liquids should be stored outside of
      for hours, even after the generator has shut off.
                                           living areas in properly-labeled, non-glass safety containers. Do not
                                           store them near a fuel-burning appliance, such as a natural gas
     Use portable generators OUTSIDE ONLY. Keep them at
                                           water heater in a garage.
      least 20 feet from doors, windows, and vents that could allow
      CO to come indoors.
                                          Before refueling the generator, turn it off and let it cool down.
                                           Gasoline spilled on hot engine parts could ignite. 5123/0407/RV0917
     Install battery-operated CO alarms or plug-in CO alarms
          U.S. CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION • (800) 638-2772 • www.cpsc.gov • www.SaferProducts.gov