BE   PREPARED           FOR     A

                                           POWER

                                          OUTAGE

                                          Power  outages   are more

                                        likely to occur during severe
                                       weather  events, such  as strong

                                       thunderstorms,   hurricanes  and
                                       winter storms,  or other natural

           FEMA V-1008/December 2023    disasters, such  as wildfires.

     A power
     outage is
     when the
     electrical
     power is lost
     unexpectedly.     may disrupt   may cause businesses, may cause  may cause
                     communications,  stores, gas stations, food spoilage injuries, disease
     Power           water utilities, and ATMs, banks, schools and water or death, or
     outages . . .   transportation for a and other services to contamination. prevent use of
                       long time.         close.                    medical devices.
        PROTECT        YOURSELF         FROM     A  POWER       OUTAGE

                                                     Unplug appliances and
                 Keep freezers and
                                                     electronics to avoid damage
               refrigerators closed.
                                                     from electrical surges.
           Use generators outdoors                   Make a plan for refrigerating
            and at least 20 feet away                medicines and powering medical
            from building openings.                  devices.

          Stay fire safe. Do not use a               If safe, go to an alternate
        gas stove to heat your home.                 location for heat or cooling.

                                                Keep mobile phones and
                                                electronic equipment charged
                                                before a power outage.

          HOW               TO         STAY              SAFE

                  FROM         A   POWER          OUTAGE

           Prepare                   Survive                   Be  Safe
             NOW                     DURING                    AFTER

     Create a communications plan and keep Avoid carbon monoxide poisoning. Use When in doubt, throw it out! Throw
     a paper copy.            generators, camp stoves or charcoal grills away any refrigerated food that has been
                              outdoors, at least 20 feet away from any exposed to temperatures 40 degrees
     Install smoke and carbon monoxide alarms building openings like windows, doors or Fahrenheit or higher for more than 4
     with battery backup (if hardwired) on garages. Never use a gas stovetop, oven, hours. Throw away refrigerated food that
     every level of your home and near sleeping grill or dryer to heat your home. has an unusual odor, color or texture.
     areas. Learn the signs of carbon monoxide
     poisoning, which include flu-like symptoms. Stay fire safe. Use flashlights, lanterns and Replace refrigerated medications if the
                              other battery-powered lights. Don’t use power is out for a day or more, unless
     Talk to your doctor to make a plan for how gas stoves or candles to heat your home. the drug’s label says otherwise. Call your
     you will use your medical devices that need Always use fireplaces, portable heaters doctor or pharmacist if you depend on
     electricity, store your medications and stay and wood-burning stoves safely. refrigerated medications that have been at
     safe during a power outage.                        room temperature. Only use the medicine
                              Don’t leave a vehicle running inside a until you have a new supply.
     Gather supplies to last for several days. garage, even if the garage door is left
     Check your supplies regularly and before open. If you use your vehicle as a source
                                                         Be Prepared. Multiple Disasters
     predicted extreme weather events. If you of power or warmth, make sure to run it in
     aren’t able to build a separate emergency a well-ventilated place outside. May Happen at the Same Time.
     supply kit, make sure you know where
     items that you already have are located. Keep freezers and refrigerators closed. A Know how to stay cool in extreme
                              refrigerator will keep food cold for about heat, even when the power is out.
     Keep mobile phones and other electronic 4 hours. A full freezer will stay a safe Find places with air conditioning
     equipment charged before a power temperature for about 48 hours. Do not that you can go to. Find shade,
     outage. Plan for alternative power sources store food in the outside or in the snow wet your skin with water, avoid
     that you can use to charge devices. during cold weather. high-energy activities and wear
                                                          lightweight, light-colored clothing.
     Determine whether your phone will work Unplug appliances, equipment and
     in a power outage and how long your electronics to avoid damage from Make a plan to stay warm if a power
     battery backup (if applicable) will last. electrical surges. Use surge protection outage happens in the winter.
     Remember that landline phones will not devices.      Evaluate your safety before leaving
     work if the lines are damaged.                       your home. Consider spending the
                              Pay attention to water advisories. Boil coldest parts of the day in a location
     Make sure your vehicle’s gas tank has plenty water or use bottled water from your with heat. Check on family members
     of fuel before predicted extreme weather emergency supply kit, if needed. and neighbors if it is safe to do so.
     events in case there’s a power outage.
     Install and use your generator safely. Store
     fuel safely. Plan to prioritize the things you   Take an Active Role in
     will need to plug in. You may not be able to
                                                           Your Safety
     power all appliances at one time.
                                                     Go to Ready.gov/power-outages.
     Prepare to keep the refrigerator and
     freezer cold with ice. Keep a thermometer      Download the FEMA app to get more
     in the refrigerator and freezer so that         information about preparing for a
     you can make sure food stays at a safe
                                                           power outage.
     temperature. Be prepared to throw away
                                       FEMA V-1008
     food that’s no longer at a safe temperature.